JUDY WOODRUFF: The U.S.
Department of Homeland
Security conducted a series of
raids over
New Year's weekend on
undocumented immigrants
in a number of states, including
Georgia,
North Carolina and Texas.
Federal officials said they have
taken more
than 100 people into custody,
most of whom
arrived in the U.S. within the
past two years,
and are now awaiting
deportation.
But immigration groups are
fighting back,
and the nation's highest
immigration court
issued a ruling last night to
delay some of
the deportations.
Even before these moves,
hundreds of thousands
of undocumented immigrants were
being deported
annually. And for those who grew
up in the
U.S., that means they have found
themselves
living in what feels like a
foreign country.
Special correspondent Fred de
Sam Lazaro reports
from Mexico.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Miguel
Ramirez works in
Mexico City, and an almost daily
ritual is
to call his mother in Saint
Louis. He lived
there too, until he was deported
three years
ago, and banned for life from
ever reentering
the U.S.
MIGUEL RAMIREZ, Returnee: She's
-- she's devastated,
you know?
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: The shy
23-year-old, brought
to the U.S. by his mother as a
young child,
admits he fell in with the wrong
crowd. He
got caught in a burglary and his
sentence
was community service, until:
MIGUEL RAMIREZ: I get a note
from the judge
telling me that, because you're
an illegal
immigrant, you don't qualify for
this program,
and you're going to have to
start doing your
time.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Most of his
time was actually
done in immigrant detention
centers before
he was dropped off at the
Mexican border.
MIGUEL RAMIREZ: That, to me, was
rough. It
was one of the roughest things
ever. But,
I mean, I had to accept it. I
had no choice.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Ramirez is
one of several
young Mexican returnees profiled
in a book
called "Los Otros Dreamers" by
scholar and
social activist Jill Anderson.
Some have committed felonies,
she says, but
the vast majority have no
criminal history
or just minor infractions.
JILL ANDERSON, Author, "Los
Otros Dreamers":
For many, it's contact with
their local police
for anything from underage
drinking, accusations
from a neighbor or friends. One
young woman
was baby-sitting and had a
problem with the
family.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: In 2012,
President Obama
issued an executive order that
allowed the
children of undocumented
workers, many of
whom had grown up in the United
States, the
option to remain.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States:
Specifically for certain young
people sometimes
called dreamers.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: The order
came after Congress
rejected similar legislation
called the DREAM
Act. And it came after perhaps a
half-million
young Mexicans were either
deported or chose
to return.
WOMAN: This was a cute guy I had
a crush on
in my freshman year.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Viridiana
and Maggie belong
to Los Otros Dreamers, or the
Other Dreamers,
a group that mostly meets
online, brought
together by Anderson's book.
Viridiana says, growing up in
Iowa, she felt
no stigma over her illegal
status.
VIRIDIANA, Returnee: My parents
always told
me, never tell anyone that we're
here undocumented.
I mean, at first, it was just
kind of like,
OK, I'm young and who cares?
Like, I mean,
what's so -- what's wrong in
being undocumented?
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: It was no
big deal growing
up, she says, until:
Dad goes to work one day and...
VIRIDIANA: Never comes home.
They went to
his workplace, and they took
him.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Twenty-two
years after
he arrived and settled quietly
in small-town
Iowa, Juan Vargas (ph) was
arrested and deported.
That brought abrupt, wrenching
decisions for
others in the family.
VIRIDIANA: My older sister, she
-- she decided
to stay in the United States,
and I totally
understand that. It is my home
too. I do miss
it, but, you know, I would
rather stay with
my parents.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Viridiana
quit her job
and, with her mother, returned
to Mexico,
against her father's wishes.
VIRIDIANA: He said: "I don't
want you here.
I don't want you to be here.
Just stay home."
FRED DE SAM LAZARO:
Twenty-five-year-old Maggie
got the same advice from her
parents. Home
for her was Dalton, Georgia,
where she too
felt no different from her wide
circle of
friends until high school.
MAGGIE, Returnee: I wanted to go
to work.
I wanted to find scholarships.
That's when
things started to -- wait, so
you're different?
That's when I started to
actually recognize
I was undocumented and that I
wasn't -- I
didn't have the same
opportunities.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Lacking
money to go to
college or get a legal,
good-paying job, she
decided, agonizingly, to move to
Mexico, a
country she'd left at age 3.
MAGGIE: My parents stayed. I
came by myself
at 18. And it was during -- this
month, it
was like if somebody had died
inside of me,
because it was like, OK, bye,
house, bye,
church, bye, friends, bye,
school, bye, dog.
I mean, I wasn't prepared.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Mexico
wasn't prepared
for her or other returnees
either. Until recently,
U.S. education credentials were
not even recognized.
Aside from official
indifference, Viridiana
says there's social stigma and
suspicion that
they are criminal deportees.
VIRIDIANA: Why are you back?
That's like the
first thing that they ask. Why
are you back?
What is the problem? They treat
us like crap.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Author Jill
Anderson:
JILL ANDERSON: They realize,
wow, I thought
I was Mexican. I don't talk like
a Mexican
because of my accent when I
speak Spanish.
People actually will call me
pocho or gringo,
and question as to why I'm even
here.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: There is one
industry
that is happy they're here: call
centers,
whose operators speak American
English.
WOMAN: I get to meet people from
all over
the United States when they call
my employer
with their customer service
questions.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Call centers
have proliferated
across Mexican cities, their
promotional videos
like this one on the Internet
geared to American
customers. It's one of few
places where returnees
can find work. They even waived
the requirement
of a high school diploma for
Miguel Ramirez,
and he says they pay a decent
wage.
MIGUEL RAMIREZ: This job is very
tedious.
You feel like you're getting
nowhere. It doesn't
make me feel very successful or
proud of myself,
to be honest with you. I want to
do something
more.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Call centers
do report
a high turnover. And living in
Mexico, where
many people struggle with life's
more basic
needs, Viridiana says it was
hard for her
to deal with what she saw as
trivial concerns.
VIRIDIANA: I couldn't handle the
calls. I
was just like, oh, my God, like,
these people
that -- why are they just
complaining about
their dish service? Like,
really? And then
I'm thinking like, girl, you
used to be one
of those dish people that would
call and be
like, what is wrong with you?
Your service
sucks.
(LAUGHTER)
VIRIDIANA: Like, that really
bothers me, and
I cannot do this job.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: She now
works as a transportation
dispatcher and lives with her
parents. Her
mother, Patrice Hidalgo, says,
on a fraction
of their former income, life
here is difficult.
PATRICE HIDALGO, Returnee
(through translator):
Here, because of my age I can't
get a job.
And the security situation is
not good. It's
much worse now in Mexico than it
was before
we left.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: And the
security situation
along the migration routes to
the U.S., now
overrun by gangs trafficking in
drugs and
people, keeps many from fleeing
Mexico again.
Do you ever contemplate going
back to the
United States illegally?
MIGUEL RAMIREZ: I do. I do
contemplate it,
not a lot, because there's a
risk.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: For her
part, Maggie got
a job teaching English, and she
attends college,
hoping to get into tourism
promotion.
MAGGIE: I want to travel more in
this country.
I know it's beautiful. I know it
has many
positive things. And I'm
starting to see that
beautiful side of Mexico.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: And she
plans to visit
the U.S. again, and often, only
now with passport
and visa.
For the "PBS NewsHour," this is
Fred de Sam
Lazaro in Leon, Mexico.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Fred's reporting
is a partnership
with the Under-Told Stories
Project at the
University of St. Thomas in
Minnesota.